Today I want to look at the motion of a charged particle traveling between parallel plates.
So I've illustrated the problem over here on the board.
So we've got two plates.
One is positively charged with a charge density plus sigma.
The other one is negatively charged with a the opposite charge on it.
We have a small particle with a charge q moving into the region where the there's a constant field and
the initial velocity is v zero.
And what I want to do now is I want to look at the motion of this charge particle when it's traveling
between the parallel plates.
So let's look at a couple simple cases.
The first is what if there is no charge on the plates.
There's no charge on the plates.
The particle is simply going to continue along the dotted line and will not be deflected.
It continues along the dotted line because there's simply no force acting on the charge.
Then the other case we can do is what if there's a lot of charge.
If there's a lot of charge on the plates one thing you should know is that the field between the plates
goes from the positive to the negative.
And if we neglect things going on at the edges the field between the plates is uniform.
The magnitude of the field is simply equal to Sigma divided by epsilon 0.
Okay let's have a look.
Now when the field is very very strong what's gonna happen.
While this charge is going to enter the field region and as soon as it enters the field region there's
gonna be a force acting on the charge of the force acting on the charge against since it's a positive
charge a positive charge in a field that points from the top plate to the bottom plate.
As soon as it enters the field region there's a force acting on it.
There's an electric force F acting on it and the value of the force is simply the magnitude of the charge.
Times the electric field in that region.
So this is kind of a special case right.
If the field is very very big in the field will be very big.
If you have a lot of charge on it.
If I have a very large charge density the field produced between the plates is going to be very very
big.
Well what's gonna happen now is the charge is going to enter this region and there is going to be a
large force on it.
Right there is a repulsive force from the positive plate acting on the positive charge and there is
an attractive force on the positive charge going through this region.
So if the field is very very big this is what it's going to do.
It's simply going to curve downward and eventually hit that negative plate.
What we don't want that to happen.
OK.
The question is what is the maximum charge.
BIG Q that I can put on the plates so that I have the maximum deflection of that positive charge.
So if you think about it if I put just the right amount of charge on these plates I'm going to generate
just the right electric field such that the charged particle as soon as it enters the region starts
getting deflected.
And if it's just right I'm gonna get this maximum deflection and the little charge q is going to exit
the field region at some particular angle.
It's not going to hit the plate and it's not gonna go straight it's just going to be the maximum deflection
that you can have for that particular charge so let's go to the whiteboard and see how we can calculate
what value of uppercase Q I need to put on the plates in order to have this maximum deflection for this
small charge moving through that region.
All right.
So here's our problem we have our charge moving into the region where the field is the first thing you
should do is consider free body diagram.
We want to analyze the motion so let's look at the forces again.
There's only a single force acting on it.
That's the electric force and the magnitude of the force is simply Q times the magnitude of the electric
field.
Since there's only one force noone second losses you add up all the forces.
Those should be equal to many.
So the nice thing is now we have an expression for our acceleration and we simply have QE divided by
the mass of the particle All right.
The nice thing about this.
This is a constant acceleration
and that means the rotation.
That means now.
Now we can use all our key nomadic equations in order to analyze the motion of this charged particle
between the plates.
So let's go to the next page and see how he would do that.
OK so now let's look at the Kitimat X in the x direction.
Well in the end the record in the x direction we want to look at the displacement in the x direction.
Call that delta x and that's simply going to be equal to the initial velocity in the x direction which
is v not times the time the other quantity we want to know during the trajectory is the velocity in
the x direction at any time.
And that's simply going to be equal to the initial velocity.
There's no acceleration the x direction this problem because the electric field is constant the electric
force is constant.
So that's it.
Let's look at now in the y direction our displacement Y is going to be equal to where we have our initial
velocity in the y direction.
There is no initial velocity in the y direction.
OK so that term vanishes so typically you'd have a term like this.
And if we define a coordinate system where positive X is this way.
And let's make positive y in this direction.
So our acceleration will be positive.
We have another contribution here which is 1 1/2 80 squared.
However this term as I mentioned equals the zero because there is no initial velocity initially I'm
just going along the x axis.
The other thing I want to know is what is the velocity at any motion at any point in time in the y direction.
Again it's the initial velocity in the y direction which is zero and we can't forget our acceleration
term plus acceleration times time.
Okay.
There you have it folks.
So we have kinetic equations that tell us the X displacement the Y displacement and the velocity components
at any instant in time.
So now we can go back and analyze the problem and find what we're looking for.
So this problem is exactly identical to throwing an object horizontally from a cliff and you want to
see how far it goes.
We want the range in this particular problem.
So the distance it travels to be the distance of the plates or the length of the plates which is L and
we're gonna want to set our y displacement to be the maximum value when the Y displacement is equal
to D over 2.
We're gonna get the maximum deflection of this charged particle when it goes through the plates.
So let's go to the next page and set that problem up.
OK so we want our maximum deflection where we want to calculate what the maximum deflection is going
to be.
Well all we really need to do is we really need to set the wide displacement equal to half the distance
between the plates because I'm starting already at the midpoint.
So I really want my wide displacement to be d over 2 and positive D over 2 because the displacement
is down that there is going to be equal to one half.
What is my acceleration the acceleration I can write it in terms of the field QE over him over the multiply
times T squared.
Therefore I still have the the time in this equation so I need to find a way to eliminate the time in
order to do that I can use my X displacement because really when I want to do is I want this maximum
displacement to be when the particle is just exiting the plates and that's gonna be when my displacement
in the x direction is equal to l.
When do I have that I'm gonna have the displacement is gonna be equal to the length of the plates.
When the time is simply l divided by my initial velocity.
So if you go ahead and substitute that into our equation over here for the Y displacement we get D over
to equals to one half QE and we're gonna have l over V not squared.
So this here is the maximum displacement
and this here is really gonna be the maximum electric field that's going to give me that displacement.
I can actually just isolate for that and what do I get while the 1 1/2 terms cancel out.
Just do a little bit of algebra and simplify.
So the maximum electric field that I'm gonna get that will produce the maximum displacement is going
to be M D.
Sure I do things correctly here divide through by the charge and then I have to eliminate this term
the L over V not term I bring that over to the other side it becomes V not over l it's still squared.
So here's the maximum value of the electric field.
Now the question was posed a little bit differently I asked what's the maximum charge on the plate.
That's very easy because we're looking at parallel plates and the field produced by parallel plates
at least in the region between the plates is Sigma divided by epsilon 0 and the sigma is simply the
surface charge density it's the amount of charge you have per unit area of plate and we still have the
Epsilon 0 constant so the maximum electric field is going to be for any given geometry.
Whenever I maximize the charge density or maximize the charge on the plates.
So our last step putting everything together now make a bit more room here.
Okay so we're gonna have q Max
is going to be equal to the area.
Epsilon 0.
Mass times distance of the plates divided by Q and V not over L squared all right.
So there's the final answer expressed in terms of the geometry of the plate the area and the distance
and in terms and the length and also in terms of some of the properties of the charge.
So the small charge q the mass of the charge M and also the initial velocity v 0.
Okay so this makes a lot of sense actually if the particles going very very fast in order to get it
to have a maximum displacement here when I'm between the charges or between the plates rather it's going
very very fast.
You'd expect that you would need more charge on the plates in order to achieve this deflection in a
fixed length.
There you have it folks.